---
layout: post
title: "CLRS 16.4: Matroids and greedy methods"
date: 2023-07-29 00:03:00+0800
description: 
tags: clrs
categories: notes
related_posts: false
---

The section introduces matroids, an abstract combinatorial structure which sort of generalises the greedy approach. It is interesting that if we can cast a problem as a matroid, we can apply the exact same greedy method which yields optimal solutions. In fact - it is true that greedy is optimal on a problem _if and only if_ the problem can be represented as a matroid!



A **matroid** is an ordered pair $$M=(S,\mathcal{I})$$ satisfying the following conditions:

1. $$S$$ is a finite set.
2. $$\mathcal{I}$$ is a nonempty family of subsets of $$S$$, called the _**independent**_ subsets of $$S$$, such that if $$B\in \mathcal{I}$$ and $$A\subseteq B$$, then $$A\in \mathcal{I}$$. We say that $$\mathcal{I}$$ is _**hereditary**_ if it satisfies this property. Note that $$\emptyset$$ is neccessarily a member of $$\mathcal{I}$$.
3. If $$A\in \mathcal{I}, B\in \mathcal{I}$$, and $$\lvert A\rvert < \lvert B\rvert$$, then there exists some element $$x\in B - A$$ such that $$A\cup \{x\} \in \mathcal{I}$$. We say that $$M$$ satisfies the _**exchange property**_.

A natural example given is the **graphic matroid** $$M_G = (S_G, \mathcal{I}_G)$$, defined in terms of an undirected graph $$G=(V,E)$$ as follows:

* The set $$S_G$$ is defined to be $$E$$
* A set of edges $$A$$ is independent if and only if the subgraph $$G_A = (V,A)$$ forms a forest (i.e. $$A$$ is acyclic).

$$M_G$$, defined as such, is proven to be a matroid.

Here is a summary of the other important definitions/theorems covered:

* Given a matroid $$M=(S,\mathcal{I})$$, we call an element $$x\notin A$$ an _**extension**_ of $$A\in\mathcal{I}$$ if $$A\cup \{x\} \in \mathcal{I}$$. With reference to the graphic matroid, an edge $$e$$ is an extension to a forest $$A$$ if and only if the addition of $$e$$ does not create a cycle.
* If $$A$$ is an independent subset in a matroid $$M$$, we say that $$A$$ is _**maximal**_ if it has no extensions.
* (Theorem 16.6) All maximal independent subsets in a matroid have the same size. (e.g. all spanning trees are maximal independent subsets and have the same number of edges)
* A matroid $$M=(S,\mathcal{I})$$ is _**weighted**_ if it is associated with a weight function $$w$$ that assigns a striclty positive weight $$w(x)$$ to each element $$x\in S$$. The function $$w$$ extends to subsets of $$S$$ by summation, i.e. $$w(A) = \sum_{x\in A} w(x)$$ for any $$A\subseteq S$$. E.g. if we let $$w(e)$$ denote the weight of an edge $$e$$, then $$w(A)$$ is the total weight of the edges in edge set $$A$$.
* Given a weighted matroid $$M=(S,\mathcal{I})$$, suppose we sih to find an independent set $$A\in\mathcal{I}$$ such that $$w(A)$$ is maximised. We call such a subset an _**optimal**_ subset of the matroid. Note that since $$w(x)$$ is always positive, an optimal subset is always a maximal independent subset.

---
**On maximal independent sets**

A maximal independent set is called a *basis* for the matroid - as per linear algebra!. Matroids also serve to abstract the notion of *independence* in vector space, however I don't feel qualified to expand on that here :(

[Interesting reference](https://jeremykun.com/2014/08/26/when-greedy-algorithms-are-perfect-the-matroid/)

---

In other words, the _**maximum-spanning-tree problem**_ on a connected undirected graph $$G=(V,E)$$ boils down to finding an optimal subset of the weighted matroid $$M_G$$, where weight function $$w(e)$$ is the weight of the edge $$e$$. This also corresponds easily to the *minimum*-spanning-tree problem, by tweaking $$w(e)$$ slightly.

The following is the "characteristic" greedy algorithm given which works for any weighted matroid. The algorithm takes as input a weighted matroid $$M=(S,\mathcal{I})$$ with an associated positive weight function $$w$$, and returns an optimal subset $$A$$:

1. A = $$\emptyset$$
2. sort $$S$$ into decreasing order by weight $$w$$
3. for each $$x$$ in $$S$$ taken in decreasing order:
4. &emsp;if $$A \cup \{x\}\in \mathcal{I}$$
5. &emsp;&emsp;$$A=A\cup \{x\}$$
6. return $$A$$

If the check for independence on set $$A\cup\{x\}$$ takes $$O(f(n))$$, the entire algorithm runs in time $$O(n\,log\,n + nf(n))$$.

> **Problem 16.4-1**
> Show that $$(S,\mathcal{I_k})$$ is a matroid, where $$S$$ is any finite set and $$\mathcal{I_k}$$ is the set of all subsets of size at most $$k$$, where $$k\leq \lvert S \rvert$$.

Proof:

Since $$S$$ is finite, it suffices to show the _hereditary_ and _exchange_ properties.

For any $$A\in\mathcal{I_k}\,$$, if $$B \subseteq A$$, then $$\lvert B\rvert \leq \lvert A\rvert \leq k$$. Thus $$B \in \mathcal{I_k}$$ and $$\mathcal{I_k}$$ is _hereditary_.

If $$A\in\mathcal{I_k}, B\in\mathcal{I_k}$$ and $$\lvert A\rvert < \lvert B\rvert$$, then pick an element $$x \in B - A$$. We have $$\lvert A\cup \{x\}\rvert = \lvert A\rvert + 1 \leq \lvert B\rvert \leq k$$, thus $$A\cup\{x\} \in \mathcal{I_k}$$. Hence $$(S,\mathcal{I_k})$$ satisfies the _exchange property_.

> **Problem 16.4-2**
> Given an $$m \times n$$ matrix $$T$$ over some field, show that $$(S,\mathcal{I})$$ is a matroid, where $$S$$ is the set of columns of $$T$$ and $$A\in\mathcal{I}$$ if and only if the columns in $$A$$ are linearly independent. ()

Proof:

Linear algebra.

> **Problem 16.4-3**
> Show that if $$(S,\mathcal{I})$$ is a matroid, then $$(S,\mathcal{I}')$$ is a matroid, where $$\mathcal{I}' = \{A':S-A' \,\text{contains some maximal}\, A\in \mathcal{I}\}$$, that is, the maximal independent sets of $$(S,\mathcal{I}')$$ are just the complements of the maximal independent sets of $$(S,\mathcal{I})$$.

Proof:

It suffices to show the _hereditary_ and _exchange_ properties hold on $$\mathcal{I'}$$.

Suppose $$A\in\mathcal{I'}$$, that is there is some maximal $$X\subseteq\mathcal{I}$$ contained within $$S-A$$. Let any $$B\subseteq A$$, then $$X\subseteq S - A \subseteq S-B$$, thus $$B\in \mathcal{I'}$$, and $$\mathcal{I'}$$ is _hereditary_.

Consider any $$A,B \in \mathcal{I}'$$ such that $$\lvert A\rvert < \lvert B\rvert$$. We split into two cases. 

Case 1: If $$\lvert B-A\rvert = 1$$, then in this case $$A\subset B$$, and we can simply extend $$A$$ to $$B$$ for the exchange property to hold.

Case 2: Let $$m$$ be the size of any maximal independent set in $$\mathcal{I}$$, and let $$Q$$ be some maximal independent set contained in $$S-B$$. Note $$\lvert T\rvert = m$$. Then let $$P$$ be some size $$m-1$$-subset of some maximal independent set in $$S-A$$. By the exchange property on $$\mathcal{I}$$, there exists some $$x$$ in $$Q-P$$ such that $$P\cup\{x\}$$ is a maximal independent set. Since $$\lvert B-A\rvert > 1$$, there must be an element $$y\in B-A$$, $$y\neq x$$ such that $$S-(A\cup\{y\})$$ contains $$P\cup\{x\}$$, i.e. we have extended $$A$$ to another independent set in $$\mathcal{I}'$$.

Note: I think this is known as the *dual* of a matroid $$M$$.

> **Problem 16.4-4**
> Let $$S$$ be a finite set and let $$S_1, S_2, \ldots ,S_k$$ be a partition of $$S$$ into nonempty disjoint subsets. Define the structure $$(S,\mathcal{I})$$ by the condition that $$\mathcal{I} = \{A:\lvert A\cap S_i\rvert \leq 1\,\text{for}\, i=1,2,\ldots,k\}$$. Show that $$(S,\mathcal{I})$$ is a matroid. That is, the set of all sets $$A$$ that contain at most one member of each subset in the partition determines the independent sets of a matroid.

Proof:

Hereditary property - Let $$A\in\mathcal{I}$$, and suppose $$B\subseteq A$$. Then clearly $$\lvert B\cap S_i\rvert \leq \lvert A\cap S_i\rvert \leq 1$$ for any disjoint subset $$S_i$$. Thus $$B\in \mathcal{I}$$.

Exchange property - Let $$A,B \in \mathcal{I}$$ such that $$\lvert A\rvert < \lvert B\rvert$$. Each element in $$B$$ must be in distinct subsets of the partition, and similarly for $$A$$. Since $$\lvert A\rvert < \lvert B\rvert$$, there must be some $$x \in B$$ such that $$x \in S_i$$ and $$\lvert A\cap S_i\rvert = 0$$, for some subset of the partition $$S_i$$. Then we can extend $$A$$ to $$A\cup\{x\}$$, satisfying the exchange property.



