---
layout: post
title: "CLRS Appendix B: Equivalent conditions for trees"
date: 2023-06-27 00:01:20+0800
description: On trees
tags: clrs math
categories: notes
related_posts: false
---

A _tree_ is a connected, acyclic (undirected) graph. Let $$G = (V,E)$$ be an undirected graph. Here are some equivalent conditions for $$G$$ to be a tree:

1. $$G$$ is a tree.
2. Any two vertices in $$G$$ are connected by a unique simple path.
3. $$G$$ is connected, but if any edge is removed from $$E$$, the resulting graph is disconnected.
4. $$G$$ is connected, and $$\lvert E\rvert= \lvert V\rvert-1$$.
5. $$G$$ is acyclic, and $$\lvert E\rvert = \lvert V\rvert-1$$.
6. $$G$$ is acyclic, but if any edge is added to $$E$$, the resulting graph contains a cycle.

---

I will roughly prove their equivalence here.

$$(1) \Rightarrow (2)$$:
Since $$G$$ is connected, any two vertices $$u, v$$ are connected by at least one simple path. If there exists more than one such path between $$u$$ and $$v$$, then $$G$$ contains a cycle (Contradiction).

$$(2) \Rightarrow (3)$$:
Suppose we remove edge $$(u,v)$$. If there still exists a path between $$u$$ and $$v$$, then there would have more than one simple path connecting $$u$$ and $$v$$ initially (Contadiction). Thus $$u$$ and $$v$$ must not be connected after the removal of $$(u,v)$$ so the resulting graph is disconnected.

$$(3) \Rightarrow (4)$$:
Prove by strong induction (see (A) below).

$$(4) \Rightarrow (5)$$:
Suppose $$G$$ contains cycles. Remove edges from cycles in $$G$$ until we get an acyclic graph $$G'=(E',V')$$. Note that $$G'$$ is still connected, so $$\lvert E'\rvert \geq \lvert V'\rvert - 1$$. However, $$\lvert E\rvert = \lvert V\rvert -1$$, so this implies we have removed 0 edges! Thus $$G$$ must have been acyclic$$.

$$(5) \Rightarrow (6)$$:
See (B) below.

$$(6) \Rightarrow (1)$$:
Suppose there is no path connecting $$u$$ and $$v$$ in $$G$$. Then add the edge $$(u,v)$$ to $$G$$. This new edge cannot have formed a cycle (Contradiction). Thus $$G$$ must have been connected initially.

---

Additionally, here are two more useful facts: (can be proven via strong induction)

A. $$G$$ is connected $$\Rightarrow \lvert E\rvert \geq \lvert V\rvert-1$$.

B. $$G$$ is acyclic $$\Rightarrow  \lvert E\rvert \leq \lvert V\rvert-1$$.
