---
layout: post
title: "CLRS 16.2: Greedy algorithms"
date: 2023-07-26 00:03:00+0800
description:
tags: clrs
categories: notes
related_posts: false
---

> **Problem 16.2-7**
>
> Suppose you are given two sets $$A$$ and $$B$$, each containing $$n$$ positive integers.
> You can choose to reorder each set however you like. After reordering, let $$a_i$$ be
> the $$i$$-th element of set $$A$$, and let $$b_i$$ be the $$i$$-th element of set $$B$$.
> You then receive a payoff of $$\prod_{i} a_i^{b_i}$$. Give an algorithm that will
> maximise your payoff.

---

Intuitively, it seems that sorting the sets $$A$$ and $$B$$ will maximise the payoff,
by giving the greater exponents to the greater bases. We can prove that this is optimal.

Let set $$A = {a_1,a_2,\ldots,a_n}$$ be in sorted order. Suppose $$B$$ is ordered such that
there is some $$i,j$$ such that $$i<j$$ but $$b_i > b_j$$. Note that the product $$a_i^{b_i}{a_j}^{b_j}$$ is a factor of the final payoff, and we can just try to improve this factor. If we swap the positions of $$b_i$$ and $$b_j$$, the new product $$a_i^{b_j}a_j^{b_i}$$ changes by a factor
of $$a_i^{b_i-b_j}a_j^{b_j-b_i} > a_i^{b_i-b_j}a_i^{b_j-b_i} = 1$$, and thus increases.

If $$B$$ is in sorted order, then no such $$i,j$$ will exist, and we can no longer improve
the payoff by this process anymore. Thus sorting $$B$$ must then provide the optimal payoff
(Noting that an optimal payoff clearly exists).

---

> **Problem 16.2-6**
>
> Show how to solve the fractional knapsack problem in $$O(n)$$ time.

I was quite surprised to learn that there is an $$O(n)$$ solution, but it kind of makes
sense when comparing it to finding order statistics.

The classic $$0-1$$ knapsack problem has a thief robbing a store with $$n$$ items.
The $$i$$-th item is worth $$v_i$$ dollars and weighs $$w_i$$ pounds, where $$v_i$$ and $$w_i$$
are integers. The thief wants to maximise the value of his load, but he can carry at most $$W$$ pounds in his knapsack, where $$W$$ is an integer.

In the fractional knapsack problem, the thief can take any fraction of each item. It is actually an easier problem, because we can greedily select the item with the best value-for-weight ratio, $$v_i/w_i$$. Sorting the items by this ratio will take $$O(n\,log \,n)$$.

However, intuitively we are not particularly interested in the _order_ of the items, so sorting is extra effort. Since we can only carry $$W$$ pounds, as long as a set of the highest value-for-weight items have total weight less than $$W$$, we are always taking the whole set (regardless of order). I found the following solution online:

We can find the item of median value-for-weight in $$O(n)$$ (using quickselect), and sum the weight of all items with value-for-weight greater than the median as $$M$$. If $$M > W$$, then we know that the solution lies in taking items only among this collection, i.e. we are solving the fractional knapsack problem on input of size $$n/2$$. If $$M < W$$, then we take all $$M$$ pounds of high value-for-weight items, and solve the fractional knapsack problem again on the remaining $$n/2$$ items. We have a runtime of $$T(n) = T(n/2) + O(n)$$, which gives a total runtime of $$O(n)$$.
